>> Hello out there on the live stream. Thank you everyone for joining us. It's great to
have you here. If you have questions, please put them in the comments and we'll try to
make them part of the show. So without further ado, we'll get started on the podcast. My
guest is John Reese. John, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
>> Howdy. It's good to be here.
>> Yeah, it's great to have you here as well. It's going to be a lot of fun to talk to you
about async stuff. I think we both share a lot of admiration and love for asyncioing
all the things.
>> I definitely do. It's one of those cases where the things that it enables is so different
and you have to think about everything so differently when you're using asyncio that
it's a nice challenge, but also has potentially really high payoff if it's done well.
>> Yeah, it has a huge payoff. I think that it's been a little bit of a mixed bag in the
terms of the reception that people have had. I know there have been a couple of folks who've
written articles like, "Well, I tried it. It wasn't that great." I've had examples where
I'm doing something like web scraping or actually got a message from somebody who listened.
I think maybe they were listening to Python Bytes, my other podcast. But anyway, I got
a message from a listener after we covered some cool asyncio things and web scraping.
They had to download a bunch of stuff. It takes a day. Literally, it takes all day or
something. It was really crazy. Then they said, "Well, now I'm using async and now my
computer runs out of memory and crashes. It's getting it so fast." That's a large difference
right there. There's certainly a category of things where it's amazing.
>> Yeah, I think the case we've seen it most useful for is definitely doing those sorts
of concurrent web requests. Internally, it's also extraordinarily useful in monitoring
situations where you want to be able to talk to a whole bunch of servers as fast as possible.
Maybe the amount of stuff that comes back from it is not as important as being able
to just talk to them repeatedly. But you're right. There's definitely a lot of cases where
people are not necessarily using it correctly or they're hoping to add a little bit of async
into an existing thing. That doesn't always work as well as just building something that's
async from the start.
>> Yeah, and there's more frameworks these days that are welcoming of async from the
start, I guess.
>> Yeah.
>> We're going to talk about that. But before we get too far down the main topic, let's
just start with a little bit of background on you. How did you get into programming in
Python?
>> Sure. My first interaction with a computer was when I was maybe five or six years old.
My parents had a TI-99-4A, which is like the knockoff Commodore attached to the television.
And my biggest memory was that.
>> I think back to that. How could you have legible text on the CRT?
>> It was pretty bad.
>> It's bad, right?
>> My biggest memory of it is really just every time we would try to play a game and
the cartridge or tape or whatever wouldn't work correctly, it would just dump you at
a basic prompt where it's just expecting you to start typing some programming in. And nobody
in my family had a manual or knew anything about programming at the time. So it's like
there was like, I think maybe we figured out that you could print something to the screen,
but nothing beyond that. And it wasn't until we ended up getting a DOS computer a few years
later that I really started to actually do some quote unquote real programming where
we were writing like batch scripts to do menus for like deciding what program to run or things
like autoexec bat on a floppy disk in order to boot into a game.
>> I was just thinking of all the autoexec bat stuff that we had to do. Like, oh, you
want to play Doom, but you don't have enough high memory, whatever the heck that was. And
so you've got to rearrange where the drivers are. I mean, what's what a weird way to just
go, I want to play a game. So I've got to rework where my drivers are.
>> Make sure you don't load your mouse driver when you're booting into this one game that
doesn't need the mouse because otherwise you run out of memory. Yeah, it was kind of crazy.
And my biggest memory of programming there was, you know, there was QBasic on it. And
it came with this gorilla game where you just like throw bandanas at another gorilla from
like some sort of like city skyline. And I had again, not really
>> King Kong knockoff, Donkey Kong knockoff type thing.
>> Yeah, exactly. And I would struggle to figure out how that was actually doing anything.
And it was like, I'd try to poke at it and figure it out as I went. Didn't really do
that much. But it was actually my first opportunity for quote unquote, open source projects, because
there's a video game that I really, really liked called NASCAR racing. And one of the
things that I learned was you is a burgeoning part of the internet, for me, at least was
people would host these mods for the game on like GeoCities or whatever. And so these
these would change like the models for the cars or the wheels or add tracks or textures
or whatever. And I actually wrote a batch script that would let you like at the time
that you wanted to play the game, pick which of the ones you had enabled, because you couldn't
have them all enabled. So it would like is basically just a batch script that would go
and like copy a bunch of files around from one place to another. And then when you're
done with the menus or whatever, then it would launch the game. And I remember posting that
on GeoCities and, you know, having the silly little like JavaScript counter or whatever
it was, you know, take up to like a couple hundred page views of people downloading just
this script to to switch mods in and out. And so that was like the first real taste
of open source programming or open source projects that I had. But that actually like
led into the way that I really learned programming, which was, I wanted to have my own website
that was more dynamic than what GeoCities had. And so I ended up basically picking up
Perl and eventually PHP to write your web pages that I hosted on my own machine at home
from like IIS and...
How did you get... what did you use like DynDNS or something like that?
Yes, exactly. DynDNS. It was it was the jankiest setup, but it at least worked and I could
impress my friends. And it wasn't until I got to college and I was working on my first
internship where the main project I was working on was essentially improving an open source
bug tracker written in PHP in order to make it do the things that my company wanted to
be able to do in it. So like adding a plug in system and things like that. And in the
process of that, I eventually became a maintainer of the project and they had a bunch of Python
scripts for managing releases, like doing things like creating the release tarballs,
running other sort of like linter type things over the code base. That was my very first
taste of Python. And I hated it because it was just like I couldn't get past the concept
of like you're forcing me to do white space. Like how barbaric is this? But it actually
didn't take long before I realized that that actually makes the code more readable. It's
like you can literally pick up anybody else's Python script and it looks almost exactly
like how you would have done it yourself.
Yeah. And you got a lot of the PEP 8 rules and tools that automatically re format stuff
into that. So it's very likely you've got black and PyCharms reformatting and whatnot.
This was all before that. So I think this was when like Python 2.6 was the latest. This
was quite a while ago, but right before the big diversion where there was. Yeah, yeah,
exactly. Like I had no idea what Python three was until like three, two or three, three
came out because it was just sequestered in this world of writing scripts for whatever
version of Python was on my Linux box at the time. Right, right, right. Yeah. You know,
I suspect in the early days, probably the editors were not as friendly or accommodating.
Right. Like now if you work with PyCharm or VS Code or something, you just write code
and it automatically does the formatting and the juggling and whatnot. You know, once you
get used to it, you don't really think that much about it. It just magically happens as
you work on code. Yeah. I'm wanting to say at the time I was just doing something stupid
like notepad plus plus or, you know, one of the other like really generic free text editors
like notepad, but it was a clip. It might've been a clips. Yeah. Was it maybe PIDev? I
don't think I ever use a Python specific editor. Like I think I've tried PyCharm exactly once
and I do just enough stuff that's not Python that I don't want to deal with a, an ID or
editor that's not generalized. Right. Sure. Makes sense. Speaking of stuff you work on,
what do you do day to day? What kind of stuff do you do? Sure. So I'm a production engineer
at Facebook on our internal Python foundation team. And so most of what I do there is, you
know, building infrastructure or developer tools primarily enabling engineers, data scientists,
and AI or ML researchers to, you know, do what they do in Python every day. So some
of that is like building out the system that allows us to integrate open source third party
packages into the Facebook repository. Some of that is literally developing new open source
tools for developers to use. So a while back I built a tool called, called Bowler that
is basically a refactoring tool for Python. And it's based off of lib two to three that's
in open source Python and essentially gives you a way to make safe code modifications
rather than using regular expressions, which are terrible. Yeah. And like the AST or something
like that. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Okay. And it's like the benefit of lib CST is that
it takes in the concrete syntax tree. So it keeps track of all the white space comments
and everything else. So that if you modify the tree in, in lib two to three, it will
then allow you to write that back out exactly the way the file came in. Whereas the AST
module would have thrown all of that, you know, metadata away.
Right. Formatting spaces, whatever, it doesn't care.
Yeah. And one of the newer projects I've worked on is called usort. And it's like micro sort.
Essentially it's a replacement that we're using internally for isort because isort has
some potentially destructive behaviors in its default configuration. And our goal was
essentially to get import sorting done in a way that does not require adding comment
directives all over the place. Right.
So the obvious example of that would be if you import some module and then you
won't need to call a function out of it, like maybe that function will modify the import
semantics or add in a special import hook or things like that. Or turn off network accesses
like the two main use cases we see. And then you go and import more stuff after that. With
isort, it would try to move all those imports above the function call that blocks the network
access.
I see. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And you want that to happen first and then it can go crazy.
And you can't just put a skip directive on that function call because that just means
isort won't try to sort that one, but it'll sort everything else around it as well. And
so what we ended up seeing was a lot of developers doing things like isort skip file and it just
turn off import sorting altogether. So one of the things of usort is like first do no
harm. So it's, it's trying its best to make sure that these common use cases are just
treated normally and correctly from the start. So in, in most cases, it's a much safer version
of isort. It's not complete. It's not a 100% replacement, but it's the thing we've been
using internally. And it's one of the cases where I'm, I'm proud of the way that we are
helping to build better tools for the ecosystem.
Yeah, this is really neat. I never really thought about that problem. One thing that
does drive me crazy is sometimes I'll, I'll need to change the Python path so that future
imports regardless of your working directory behave the same if you don't have a package
or something like that. Right. Something simple.
Yeah. That's super common in the AI and ML type of workflows.
Yeah. Yeah. And I get all these warnings like you should not have code that is before an
import like, well, but this one is about making the import work. If I don't put this, it's
going to crash for some people if they run it weirdly and stuff like that. Right. So
yeah, that's so interesting. Yeah. Very, very cool project. Nice. All right. So yeah, let's
dive into async. Huh? Sure. Yeah. So maybe a little bit of history, you know, Python
is hard to talk about asynchronous programming in Python without touching on the GIL global
interpreter lock normally spoken as a bad word, but it's not necessarily bad. It has
a purpose. It just, its purpose is somewhat counter to making asynchronous code run really
quick and in parallel. I mean, it's, it's one of those things where if, if you imagined
what Python would be without the global interpreter lock you end up having to do a lot more work
to make sure that let's say if you had multi-threading multi-threaded stuff going on, you'd have
to do a lot more work to make sure that they're not clobbering some shared data. Like you
look at the way that you have to have, have to have synchronizations and everything else
in Java or C++. Yeah. We don't generally need that in Python because the GIL prevents
a lot of that bad behavior. And you know, the current efforts to kind of remove
the GIL that have been ongoing for the past eight to 10 years in every single case, once
you remove that GIL and add a whole bunch of other locks, the whole system's actually
slower. So this is one of those things where it's like, it does cause problems, but it
also enables Python to be a lot faster than it would be otherwise.
And probably simpler. Yeah. Yeah. So the global interpreter lock, when I first
heard about it, I thought of it as a threading thing and it sort of is, but you know, it's
primarily says let's create a system so that we don't have to do locks as we increment
and decrement the ref count on variables. So basically all the memory management can
happen without the overhead of taking a lock, releasing a lock, all that kind of weirdness.
Yeah. Excuse me. Yeah. So yeah, no. So we've got like a bunch of early attempts. I mean,
we've got threading and multiprocessing have been around for a while. There's Jeevan, Tornado,
but then around, I guess, was it Python three, four, we got asyncio, which is a little bit
of a different flavor than, you know, like the computational threading or the computational
multiprocessing side of async. Yeah. It's actually an interesting kind of throwback
to the way that computing happened in like the eighties and early nineties where like
windows 3.1 or classic macOS, essentially you can, you know, run your program or your
process and you actually have to cooperatively give up control of the CPU in order for another
program to work. So there'd be a lot of cases where like you're, if, if you had a bad behaving
program, you'd end up not being able to do multitasking in, you know, these old operating
systems because it was all cooperative in the case of asyncio. It's essentially taking
that mechanism where you don't need to do a lot of context switching in threads or in
processes. And you're essentially letting a bunch of functions cooperatively coexist
and essentially say like when, when your function gets to a point where it's doing a network
request and it's waiting on that network request, your function then, you know, will nicely
hand over control back to the asyncio framework. At which point the framework and event loop
can go find the next task to work on. That's, you know, that's not blocked on something.
Right. Yeah. And it's very often doesn't involve threads at all or, you know, the one main
thread, right? Like, so it's not a way to create threading. It's a way to allow stuff
to happen while you're otherwise waiting. Yeah. In the best case, you only ever have
the one thread. And now in reality it doesn't work like that because a lot of our, you know,
modern computing infrastructure is not built in an async way. So like if you look at file
access, there's basically no real way to do that asynchronously without threads. But in
the best case, like network requests and so forth, if you have the appropriate hooks from
the operating system, then that can all be completely in one thread. And that means you
have a lot less overhead from the actual runtime and process from the operating system because
you're not having to constantly throw a whole bunch of memory onto a stack and then pull
off memory from another stack and try to figure out where you were, you know, when something
interrupted you in the middle of, you know, 50 different operations.
Right. If it's started swapping out the memory it's touching that might, you know, swap out
what's in the L1, L2, L3 caches, which can have huge performance impacts. And it's just
constantly cycling back and forth out of control a lot of times, right?
Yeah. So in a lot of our testing internally, when I was working on things that would talk
to lots and lots of servers, it's like we would hit a point where somewhere between
64 and 128 threads would actually start to see less performance overall because it just
spends all of its time trying to context switch between all of these threads because you're
interrupting these threads, you know, at an arbitrary point in time because the runtime
is trying to make sure that all the threads are serviced equally. But in reality, like
half of these threads don't need to be given the context right now. So by, you know, doing
those sort of interrupts in context, which is when the runtime wants to rather than when
the functions or requests are wanting to, you end up with a lot of suboptimal behavior.
Yeah, interesting. Yeah. And also things like locks, mutexes and stuff don't work in this
world because it's about, you know, what thread has access. Well, it's all the codes on one
thread. So to me, the real Zen of async I/O, at least for many really solid use cases,
kind of like we touched on, is it's all about scaling when you're waiting. Like if I'm waiting
on something else, it's like completely free to just go do it. If I'm calling microservices,
external APIs, if I'm downloading something or uploading a file or talking to a database
or even maybe accessing a file with something like AIO files. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's
a cool place called AI Awesome Async I/O by TMLFreer, which is pretty cool. Have you seen
this place? I have looked at it in the past. I end up spending so much time looking at
and building things. It's like I haven't actually gotten a lot of opportunity to use a bunch
of these. Most of my time, I'm actually not working that high enough on the stack to make
use of them. Right. Right. Right. These are more a lot of more frameworks. You do have
some other neat things in there as well, like async SSH. I hadn't heard of that one. But
anyway, I'll put that in the show notes. That's got, I don't know, 50, 60 libraries and packages
for solving different problems with async I/O, which is pretty cool. Yeah. Whenever
I talk about async I/O, one of the things I love to give a shout out to is this thing
called unsync. Have you heard of unsync? I had not heard about it until I looked at
the show notes. But it sounds a lot like some of the some of the things that I've seen people
implement a lot of different cases. It's a very filling a common sort of use case where
you have, like I was saying earlier, where people want to mix async I/O into an existing
synchronous application. You do have to be very careful about how you do that, especially
vice versa or or a lot of the stumbling blocks we've seen tend to be cases where you
have synchronous code that calls some async code that then wants to call some synchronous
code but on like another thread so that it's not blocked by it. And you actually end up
getting this like in out in out sort of thing where you have like nested layers of async
I/O. I'm not sure how much this may or may not solve that.
I think this actually helps some with that as well. Basically, the idea is there's two
main things that it solves that I think it's really neat. One, it's like a unifying layer
across multi processing, multi threading and straight async I/O. Right. So you put a decorator
onto a function. If the function is an async function, it runs it on async I/O. If it's
a regular function, it runs it on a thread. And if you say it's a regular function, but
it's computational, it'll run it on and multi processing. But it gives you basically an
async I/O async and await API for it. It figures out how to run the loop. Anyway, it's pretty
cool. Not what we're here to talk about, but it's definitely worth checking out while we're
on the subject.
So ultimately, it gives you just a future that you can then either await or ask for
the result from. Right. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. And the result you instead of saying, you've
got to wait till it's finished before you get the result, you just go give me the result.
And if it needs to, it'll just block. So it's a nice way to sort of cap the async I/O. You
know, like one of the challenges of async I/O is, well, five levels down the call stack,
this thing wants to be async. So the next thing's async. So the next thing I'll say
sync and like all of a sudden everything's async, right. And so it was something like
this. I mean, you could do it yourself as well. You can like just go create an event
loop, run it. And at this level, we're not going to be async above it, but we're coordinating
stuff below using async I/O. And here's where it stops.
Yeah, it sounds like a nicer version of what I see dozens of when you have lots and lots
of engineers that, you know, aren't actually working on the same code base together, but
they're all in the same repository. And we end up seeing these cases where everybody
has solved the same use case. I do think this would be useful. And I'm actually planning
on sharing it with more people.
Yeah, yeah. Check it out. It's like a subtotal, I think, 126 lines of Python in one file,
but it's really cool, this unifying API. All right. So I guess that probably brings us
to OmniLib. You want to talk about that for a little bit? So this is what I thought would
be fun to have you on the show to really focus on is like async I/O, but then also you've
created this thing called OmniLib, the OmniLib project that has, solves, what's it, four
problems, four different problems with async I/O. And obviously you can combine them together,
I would expect.
Yeah. The origins of this really is like I had built the, like AIO SQLite was the first
thing that I wrote that was an async framework. And then I'd built a couple more. And at one
point I realized these projects are actually getting really popular and people are using
it, but they're just like one of the hundred things that are on my GitHub profile and graveyard.
So I really felt like they needed to have their own separate place for like, these are
the projects that I'm actually proud of. And I thought that was actually a good opportunity
to be able to make a dedicated like project or organization for it. And essentially say
that everything under this I'm guaranteeing is going to be developed under a very inclusive
code of conduct that I personally believe in and want to try and also at the same time
make it more welcoming and supportive of other contributors, especially newcomers or other
otherwise marginalized developers in the ecosystem and try to be as friendly as possible with
it. And it's like, this is something that I tried to do beforehand and just never really
formalized it on any of my projects other than like, here's a code of conduct file in
the repository. But this is like really one of the first times where I wanted to put all
these together and make sure that these are really like, this is going to be whether or
not enough people make it a community. I want it to be welcoming from the outset.
Right. That's really cool. And you created your own special GitHub organization that
you put in all under stuff like that. So it's kind of the things that are graduated from
your personal projects. Is that the story?
Yeah. And kind of the threshold I tried to follow is like, if this is worth making a
Sphinx documentation site for then it's worth putting on, you know, OmniLab projects. So
they're not all asyncio. That just happens to be where a lot of my interests and utility
stands at. So that's, you know, that's what most of them are, or at least the most popular
ones. But there are other projects that I have also in the back burner that will probably
end up there that maybe not as useful libraries or whatever, but either way, like I said earlier,
these are the ones that I'm at least proud of.
Nice. That's cool. So you talked about the being there to support people who are getting
into open source and whatnot and having that code of conduct. What other than that, is
there like a mission behind this? Like I want to make this category of tools or solve these
types of problems or is it just these are the things that you graduated?
It's something I've tried to think about. I'm not 100% certain. I would like it to have
maybe more of a mission, but at the same time, it's like, especially from things I've had
to deal with, I work, it's like, I don't want this to be a dumping ground of stuff either.
Like I want this specifically, like in the opening statement, I want it to be a group
of high quality projects that are following this code of conduct. So from that perspective,
it's like at the moment, it's like my personal interests are always in building things where
I find gaps in availability from other libraries. So that's probably the closest to a mission
of what belongs here is just things that haven't been made yet. But either way, I just want
to have that dedication to the statement of like, I want these to be high quality. I want
them to be tested. I want them to have continuous integration and testing and well documented
and so forth. Yeah, super cool. All right. So there's four main projects here on the
homepage. You do have the attribution one, but that's, that's just kind of a bookkeeping
helper tool. Exactly. So you've got, well, let's, let's talk about the things that maybe
they're the AIO extension of. So we, in Python, we have iter tools, right? Which is like tools
for easily creating generators and such out of collections and whatnot. So you have AIO
iter tools, which is awesome. And then we have multiprocessing, which is a way around
the gills. Like here's a function and some data, go run that in a sub process and then
give me the answer. And because it's a sub process, it has its own sub GIL or its own
separate GIL. So it's all good. So you have AIO multiprocess, which is cool. And then,
you know, one of the most widely used databases is SQLite already built into Python, which
is super cool. And so you have AIO SQLite and then sort of extending that, that's like
a raw SQLite, you know, raw SQL library, that's asyncio. Then you have AQL, which is more
ORM like, I'm not sure it's a hundred percent ORM, you could categorize it for us, but yeah.
I've definitely used like in quotes, in scare quotes, ORM Lite, because I want it to be
able to essentially be a combination of like well-typed table definitions that you can
then use to generate queries against the database. As of right now, it's more like writing a,
like a DSL that lets you write a backend agnostic SQL statement.
Right. Okay. Yeah, DSL domain specific language for people who aren't entirely sure.
So really it's essentially just stringing together a whole bunch of method calls on
a table object in order to get a SQL query out of it. The end goal is to be able to have
that actually be a full end to end thing where you've defined your tables and you get objects
back from it. And then you can like call something on the objects to get them to update themselves
back into a database. But I've been very hesitant to pick an API on it for how to actually get
all that done because the, trying to do that in an async fashion is actually really difficult
to do it right. And separately, like trying to do asyncio and have everything well-typed
is, you know, it's like two competing problems that have to be solved.
Yeah. I just recently started playing with SQL alchemies 2.0, 1.4 beta API where they're
doing the async stuff and it's quite different than the traditional SQL alchemies. So yeah,
you can see the challenges there.
And it's also a case where it's like having something to generate the queries to me is
more important than having the thing that will actually go run the query. Especially
for a lot of internal use cases. We really just want something that will generate the
query or we already have a system that will talk to the database once you give it a query
and parameters. It's the piece of actually saying, defining what your table hierarchy
or structure is, and then being able to run stuff to get the actual SQL query out of it,
but have that work for both SQLite and MySQL or Postgres or whatever other backend you're
using. Having it be able to use the same code and generate the correct query based off of
which database you're talking to is the important part.
Yeah, cool. Well, there's probably a right order to dive into these, but since we're
already talking about the AQL one a lot, maybe give us an example of what you can do with
it. Maybe talk us through, it's hard to talk about code on air, but just give us a sense
of what kind of code you write and what kind of things it does for us.
So this is heavily built around the idea of using data classes. In this case, it's specifically
uses adders simply because that's what I was more familiar with at the time that I started
building this. But essentially you create a class with essentially all of your columns
specified on that class with the name and the type.
Not like SQL, but not like super heavy.
Or Django style.
Yeah, exactly.
Like native types, like id colon int, name colon str, not sa.column, column.sa.string
and so on, right?
Exactly. Like I want this to look as close to a normal data class definition as possible.
And essentially be able to decorate that and you get a special object back that when you
use methods on it, like in this case, the example is you're creating a contact. So you
list the integer ID, the name of it and the email. And whether those are like, whatever
the primary key doesn't really matter in this case, whether the ID ends up getting auto
incremented again, doesn't really matter. What we're really worried about is generating
the actual queries.
And you're assuming like somebody's created the table, it's already got a primary key
for ID, it's auto incrementing or something like that. And you just want to talk to the
thing.
Yeah. And so essentially, you take this contact class that you've created, and you can call
a select method on it that will then, you know, you can add an aware method to decide
which contacts you want to select. There's other methods for, you know, changing the
order or limits. Or furthermore, if you wanted to do joins or other sorts of things, like
it kind of expects that you know what general SQL syntax looks like. Because you string
together a bunch of stuff kind of in the same order that you would with a with a SQL query.
But the difference is that, in this case, like when you're doing the where clause, rather
than having to do an arbitrary string that says, you know, column name, like, and then
some string literal. In this case, you're saying like, where contact dot email dot like,
and then passing the thing that you want to check against. And the other alternative is
you could if you wanted to look for a specific one, you could say like, where contact dot
email equals equals, and then the value you're looking for. And so you're you're kind of
using or abusing Python's expression syntaxes to essentially build up your query, definitely
using domain specific language in this case. And but essentially, having the fluent API,
you once you string all this together, you have this query object, which you can then,
you know, pass to the appropriate engine to get an actual finalized SQL query and the
parameters that would get passed if you were doing a prepared query. But you could also
potentially like in the future, the goal was you would also be able to make manage your
connection with aq L, and basically be able to tell it to run this query on that connection.
And regardless, you'd be able to do this the same with SQL lite or MySQL or whatever. And
the library is the part that handles deciding, you know, what specific part of you know,
the incompatible SQL languages that they all use will will actually be available.
Yeah, like, for example, MySQL uses question mark for the parameters. Yeah, SQL Server
uses, I think, at parameter name, there's like, they're all have their own little style.
It's not the same, right? Yeah. And it's some of that is kind of moot because of the fact
that the most of the engine libraries that we use commonly in Python, like AI, MySQL,
or, or SQL lite or whatever, they're already kind of unified around the there's there's
a specific PEP that defines what the database interface is going to look like a DB API to
or whatever it is that so some of that work has already been done by the peps and by the
actual database engines. But there's a lot of cases where it's a little bit more subtle.
Like the semantics, especially around using a like expression. MySQL does a case insensitive
matching by default, but SQL lite doesn't. So AQL tries to kind of like unify those where
possible. But also there's there's cases, especially when you're getting into joins
or group buys, things like that, where the actual specific syntax being used will
start to vary between the different backends. And that's where we, we've had more issues,
like especially the whole point of SQL lite for a lot of people is as a drop in replacement
to MySQL when you're running your unit tests. And so you want your code to be able to do
the same thing regardless of what database engine it's connected to. And this is one
way to do that.
Okay, that's cool. Yeah, with SQL lite, you can say, the database lives in your colon
memory. Yeah, exactly. And then you can just tear it up for your unit tests, and then it
just goes away. It's nice. Yeah. So maybe that brings us to the next one, the AIO SQL
lite. Sure. This one, this one is all about asyncio, you can see from the example here,
you want to tell us about that?
Yeah. So this was, again, born out of, you know, a need for using SQL lite, especially
in in testing frameworks, and so forth to replace MySQL. And essentially, what I was
doing was taking the normal SQL lite API from Python and essentially saying, like,
how would this look in an asyncio world? Like if we were re implementing SQL lite from
the ground up in an asyncio world, how can we do that? And essentially, so in this case,
we're heavily using async context managers, and awaitables in order to actually run the
database connection to SQL lite on a separate thread, and provide as much of an async interface
to that as possible. So when you connect to a SQL lite, it spawns a background thread
that actually uses the standard SQL lite library to connect to your database. And then it has
methods on that thread object that allow you to actually make calls into that database.
And those are essentially proxied through futures. So if you want to execute a query,
when you await that query execution, it will basically cue the function call on the other
thread and basically tell it here's the future to set when the result is ready. So once the
SQL lite execution or cursor or whatever has actually completed doing what it's supposed
to do on that background thread, it then goes back to the original threads event loop and
says, you know, set this future to two finished. And so that allows the thing that's originally
awaiting it to actually come back and do something with the result.
Yeah, it sounds a little tricky, but also super helpful. And people might be thinking,
didn't we just talk about the GIL and how threading doesn't really add much, but when
you're talking over the network, or you're talking to other things, a lot of times, the
gill can be released while you're waiting on the internal SQL lite or something like
that, right? Yeah, so the internal SQL lite library
on its own will release the GIL when when it's calling into the underlying SQL lite
C library. And that's where it's waiting. So that's good.
Yeah. And I mean, the other the other side of this is that it's one thread. I'm not really
aware of anybody who's opening, you know, hundreds of simultaneous connections to a
SQL, SQL lite database, the way that people expect to do with, say, like, a O HTTP, or
things like that. So while it is, you know, potentially less efficient, if you wanted
to do a whole bunch of parallel SQL lite connections, the problem really is that SQL
lite itself is not thread safe. So it has to have a dedicated thread for each connection.
Otherwise, you risk corruption of the backing database, which sounds not good. Right? Yeah,
it's like, basically, you end up either where, where two threads clobber each other, or more
specifically, what SQL lite says is, if you absolutely try to talk to a connection from
a different thread, the Python module will complain unless you've specifically told it
No, please don't complain. I know it's unsafe, at which point SQL lite will be really upset
if you try to do a right, or modification to that database. So there are layers of protections
against that. But it is one of the underlying limitations that we have to deal with us in
this case. So if you wanted to have simultaneous connections to the same database, you'd you
really have to spin up multiple threads in order to make that happen safely.
You can always do some kind of thread pool type thing, like, we're only going to allow
eight connections at a time. And you're just going to block until one of those, yeah, it's
finished or whatever, right?
It's, it's definitely a tricky thing. So like, the expected use case with AIO SQL lite
is that you'll share the database connection between multiple workers. So you'll like,
in in the piece of your application that starts up, it would make the connection to the database,
and store that somewhere, and then essentially pass that around. And so AIO SQL lite is basically
expecting to use a queue system to say, whoever gets the query first, is the one that you
know, gets to run it first. And whoever, whoever asked for the query second, you know, is the
second one to get it. So you're still doing it all on one thread. And it's slightly less
performant that way, but it's at least safe, right? And still asynchronous, at least.
Yeah, that's good. Very nice. And one of the things that looking at your example here,
which I'll link in the show notes, of course, is Python has a lot of interesting constructs
around async and await. You know, a lot of languages, you know, you think C# or
JavaScript or whatever, it's kind of async function, await function calls are good. But
you know, we've got async with async for a lot of interesting extensions to working with
async and other constructs.
Yeah, it actually makes it really nice in some ways. And essentially, these are just
syntactic wrappers around a whole bunch of magic methods on objects, right?
Await thing, enter, do your thing, right? Then await exit, right?
And so like, the nice part is that for some amount of extra work in the library, setting
up all those magic methods everywhere and deciding, you know, the right way to use them.
The benefit at the end is that you have this very simple syntax for asynchronously iterating
over the results of a cursor. And in that case, you don't have to care that after, you
know, 64 elements of iteration, you've exhausted the local cache and now SQLite has to go back
and fetch the next batch of 64 items. In that case, it's like, that's transparent to your
application. And that's where the coroutine that's iterating over that cursor would then
hand back its control of the event loop. And the next coroutine in waiting essentially
is able to then, you know, wake up and go do its own thing too.
Right? Yeah. Oh, how cool. I didn't even really think of it that way. That's neat. All right.
Maybe next one to touch on would be AIO multiprocess.
Sure. Oh, wow. I see it just now crossed 1000 stars today. Or recently.
Oh, yeah, yeah, it did. Yeah, very recently. That's awesome.
That's my real pride and joy here is getting all those stars. So sorry. Anyways. So there's
like, there's this interesting dichotomy setup between threading and multiprocessing in Python.
So with multi threading, you're able to, you know, interleave execution. So with the gill,
it means that only one thread can actually be modifying Python objects or running Python
code at any given time. So you're essentially limited to one core of your CPU.
That's a big limitation, right? Right, right, exactly. Like, I see servers on a regular
basis that are like 64 to 100 cores. So only using one of them is basically a non starter.
You get a lot of people with pitchforks saying, why aren't we using rust? And so essentially,
what the alternative of this multiprocessing, where you're spinning up an individual process,
each has its own GIL. This does allow you for CPU intensive things to basically use
all of the available cores on your system. So if you're crunching a whole bunch of numbers
with NumPy or something like that, you could use multiprocessing and saturate all of your
cores with no problem. In this case, essentially what happens is it spawns a sub a child process
or forks the child process on Linux. And then it uses the pickle module in order to send
data back and forth between the two. And this is great. And it's really transparent. So
it's super easy to write code for multiprocessing and make use of that. But the issue becomes
if you have a whole bunch of really small things, you start to have a big overhead with
with the pickling of the data back and forth. But even worse than that,
back and forth is like really challenging, right?
Yeah. So like, if you're pickling a whole bunch of smaller objects, you actually end
up with a whole bunch of overhead from the pickle module where you're serializing and
deserializing and creating a bunch of objects and, you know, synchronizing them across those
processes. But the real problem is when you start to want to do things like network requests
that are IO bound. So in an individual process, like with multi threading, you could probably
do 60 to 100 simultaneous network requests.
But you guys maybe have more than 60 servers or something.
Sure. But like, if you're trying to do this with multiprocessing instead, where you have
a like a process pool, and you give it a whole bunch of stuff to work on, each process is
only going to work on one request at a time. And so so you might spin up a process, and
it waits for a couple seconds while it's doing that network request. And then and then it
sends it back and you haven't really gained anything. So if you actually really want to
saturate all your cores, now you need a whole bunch more processes. And that then has the
problem of a lot of memory overhead. Because even if you're using copy on write semantics
with forking, the problem is that like Python goes and touches all the ref counts on everything
and immediately, you know, removes any benefit of copy on write forked processes.
Right, which might do like the shared memory, right? So if I create 10 of these things,
like 95% of the memory just might be one copy. But if you start touching ref counts and all
sorts of stuff, you know, Instagram went so far as to disable the garbage collector to
write event that kind of stuff. It was insane. Yeah.
So it turns out that if you fork a process, as soon as you get into that new process,
Python touches like 60 to 70% of the objects in its in the pool of memory, which basically
means it now has to actually copy all of the memory from all of those objects. And so you
don't actually get to share that much memory between the child and the parent process in
the first place. So if you, you know, try to spin up, you know, a thousand processes
in order to saturate 64 cores, you are wasting a lot a lot of memory. So that's where I kind
of built this piece of AIO multiprocess, where essentially what it's doing is it's spinning
up a process pool, and it only spins up one per core. And then on each child process,
it then also spins up an asyncio event loop. And, and rather than giving a normal synchronous
function as the thing that you're mapping to a whole bunch of data points, you give
a coroutine. And in this case, what what AIO multiprocess is capable of doing is essentially
keeping track of how many in-flight coroutines each child process is executing. And essentially
being able to say that, like, if you wanted to have 32 in-flight coroutines per process,
and you had 32 processes, then of course, you have whatever 32 times 32 is, I can't
do that in my head, because I'm terrible at math. Essentially, you get, you know, the
cross product of those two numbers. And that's the number of actual concurrent things that
you can do on AIO multiprocess.
And it's like, instead of creating a whole bunch of one off run this, this thing with
this, these inputs over there, you say, well, let's create a chunk, like, let's go 32 here,
32 there, and run them, but do that in an async way. So you're scaling the weight times.
Yeah, exactly.
Right, because you're probably doing network stuff.
Yeah. And, and the benefit of this is essentially like you, you're scaling the benefits
of asyncio with the benefits of multiprocessing. So for math, it's easier for me to to figure
out. In reality, what we've seen is that you can generally do somewhere around 256 concurrent
network requests on asyncio on a single process before you really start to overload the event
loop. And the thing that a lot of people don't
Have you looked at the other event loop implementations like uv loop or any of those alternate event
loop functions?
So uv loop can make things faster. But the things that it makes faster are the parts
that process like network request headers. The the real problem at the end of the day
is that the way that the asyncio framework and event loops work is that for each task
that you give them, it basically adds it to a round robin queue of all of the things that
it has to work on. So at the end of the day, if you want to run 1000 concurrent tasks,
that's 1000 things that it has to go through an order before it gets to any one task. And
so on asking, Are you done? Are you done? Yeah, something like that, basically. And
if you're doing anything with the result of that network request before you actually return
the the real result from your co routine, then you're almost certainly going to be starving
the event loop of act or starving other co routines on the same event loop of processing
power. And so what we've seen actually, is you end up with cases where you technically
time out the request, because it's taken too long for Python or asyncio to get back to
the network request before it hits like a TCP interrupt or something like that. Right,
right.
Oh, that's interesting. Yeah. So this way, you could say like, well, throw 10 processes
or 20 processes at it and make that and so if you are willing to run like 256 network
requests per process, and you have 10 processes, or 10 cores, then suddenly you can run you
know, 2500 network requests simultaneously from asyncio and Python. And at that point,
you're probably saturating your network connection unless you're talking to mostly local hosts.
But Facebook, when you're talking about a monitoring system, that's actually what you're
doing is you're almost certainly talking to things that have super low latency to talk
to and super high bandwidth. And so this was essentially the answer to that is like, run
asyncio event loops on a whole bunch of child processes, and then do a bunch of really,
like smart things to balance the load of the tasks that you're trying to run across all
of those different processes in order to try and make them, you know, execute as quickly
as possible. And then also, whenever possible, try to reduce the amount of times that you're
serializing things back and forth. So one of the other common things that having more
processes enables you to do is actually do some of the work to process filter aggregate
that data in those child processes, rather than pickling all the data back to the parent
process and then you know, dealing with it and aggregating it there.
Right, you've already got a big scale out for CPU cores.
So it kind of gives like a local version of MapReduce, where essentially you're mapping
work across all these child processes. And then inside each batch or whatever, you're
accurate, you're, you're aggregating that data in into the result that you then send
back up to the parent process, which can then process and aggregate that data further.
Yeah, super cool. You gave a talk on this at PyCon in Cleveland, one of the last real
actual in person PyCon. Yeah. Also, the first first one I've ever attended. And the first
one that I've ever given a talk at, or first time I was a good one that we're gonna talk.
Yeah. And yeah, the room was absolutely massive and terrifying. And I don't know how I managed
to do it all.
Yeah, it's just kind of block it out, block it out. But no, it's all good. Cool. Yeah.
So I'll link to that as well. People can check that out. And it really focuses on this AIO
multi processing part, right? Yeah. Nice. All right. Last of the AIO things at OmniLib
is AIO IterTools.
Yeah. So you kind of hinted on this before, like IterTools is mostly a bunch of helpers
that let you, you know, process lists of things or iterables in nicer ways. And AIO IterTools
is just basically taking the built in functions like iterating, getting the next thing from
from an iterable or mapping, or chaining between multiple iterables or whatever, and essentially
bringing that into an async first world. So all of the functions in AIO IterTools will
accept both like normal standard iterators or lists or whatever, as well as async iterables
or generators or whatever. And essentially, it up converts everything to an async iterable,
and then gives you more async iterable interfaces to work on these.
So I know how to create a generator with like yield. So I have a function, it does a thing,
and then it goes through some processing, it says yield an item, like here's one of
the things in the list. That's already really good because it does like lazy loading, but
it doesn't scale the waiting time, right? It just waits. So for the async...
So it's tricky in this case.
What's the difference there?
In this case, if you just call the function async def, and then have a yield.
And then you have a yield statement in it, it creates an async generator, which is just
an async iterable object that similar to how when you call a coroutine, it's an object,
but it doesn't actually run until you await it. With an async generator, calling it creates
the generator object, but you don't actually...
Then the async part is done, right? At that point?
Well, it's like it still doesn't even start running it until you actually start to use
the async for or some other async iteration to then iterate over it.
So if you're using the async iterator, you still get the lazy loading of everything like
with a normal generator, but you also have the potential for your thing to be interrupted.
So the common use case here or the expected use case would be if you're doing something
like talking to a whole bunch of network hosts, and you want to return the results as they
come in as an async iterable, then you could use something like AIO iter tools to then
do things like batch up those results or run another coroutine across every result as it
comes in, things like that.
And the other added benefit in here is that there's also a concurrency limited version
of gather. So as I said earlier, when you have a whole bunch of tasks, you're actually
making the event loop do a whole bunch more work. One of the common things I've seen is
that people will spawn 5000 tasks, and each task, or they'll all have some semaphore that
limits how many of them can execute at once. But you still have 5000 tasks that the event
loop is trying to service. And so you're you're giving a whole bunch of overhead every time
it wants to switch between things. It's got to potentially go through up to 5000 of them
before it gets to one that it can actually service. So the concurrency limited version
of gather that AIO iter tools has let you specify some limit, like only run 64 things
at a time. And so it will, you know, try to fetch the first 64 things of all of the coroutines
or awaitables that you give it. And, and it will start to yield those values as they come
in. But essentially, it's making sure that the event loop would never see more than 64
active tasks at a time, at least from that specific memory, they don't get really get
thrown into the running task. So one of the challenges or criticisms almost I've seen
around asyncio is that it, it doesn't allow for any back pressure or whatever, right?
Like, if I'm talking to a database, it used to be that the web front end would have like
some kind of performance limit, it could only go so hard against the database. But if you
do just await it, like all the traffic just piles in until it potentially can't take it
anymore. And it sounds like this has some mechanisms to address that kind of generally
speaking, that's at least the general intent of it is to be able to use this concurrency
limit to try and prevent overloading either the event loop or your network or whatever.
So even if you have 5000 items, by setting the limit to 64, you know that you're only
going to be doing that many at a time. And, and then you can combine that that concurrency
limited gather with something like, like, the result of that is its own, you know, async
iterable. And then you could also combine that with things like chain or other things
in order to mix that in with the rest of the like, inner tools, functional lifestyle, if
you will.
Yeah.
Super cool. I can imagine that these might find some way to work together, you might
have some asyncio, or say, sorry, AIO, inner tools thing that then you feed off to AIO
multiprocessing or something like that.
Yeah, exactly. These are definitely a whole bunch of tools that I've put together in various
different use cases.
Yeah, very neat. All right, well, we're getting quite near the end of the show. I think we've
talked about a lot about these very, very cool libraries. So before we get out of here,
though, we touched on this at the beginning, but I'll ask you this as one of the two main
questions at the end of the show, if you're going to write some Python code, what editor
do you use?
So the snarky answer is anything with a Vim emulation mode. That was the thing that
I learned in college. And I specifically avoided answering that, like, answering that earlier
when we were talking about it. But that's what I learned when I was writing a whole
bunch of PHP code. And that's what I used for four years. And then eventually, I found
sublime text, and I really liked that. But it kind of seemed dead in the water. Adam
came out, but Adam was slow. And so these days, I'm using VS Code, primarily because
it has excellent Python integration, but also because it has a lot of like Facebook builds
a lot of the things that we used to have on top of Adam called new Clyde, which especially
were a lot of like remote editing tools. Okay, we've, we've rebuilt a lot of those on top
of VS Code, because VS Code is faster, nicer, you know, has better ongoing support from
the community and so forth.
VS Code seems like the natural successor to Adam.
Yeah. And like I said before, it's like, I had tried pi charm at one point, but it's
it's one of those cases where I touch just enough stuff that's not Python that I really
want my tools to work and function the same way regardless. And so VS Code has the better
sort of like broader language support, where it's like, there's some days where I just
have to write a bash script, and I want it to be able to do nice things for bash or,
or, you know, I use it as a markdown editor, and it has a markdown preview, things like
that.
Yeah. All right, cool. Sounds good. And then notable pipey package. I mean, I guess we
spent a lot of time on four of them, right? Five also talks about Microsoft, you sort.
Yeah. So the joke answer is, I have a package called AIO Seinfeld. That's built on top of
a SQLite. And essentially, you give it a database of Seinfeld scripts. And you you can search
for things by actor or by keyword of what they're saying. And it will essentially give
you back some elements of dialogue from from a script that contains your search query.
And this is powering a site I have called Seinfeld quote.com, which is basically just
a really old bootstrap template that that lets you search for pieces of Seinfeld quotes.
I also implemented a chat bot and discord for some of my friends that also uses this.
The more serious answer would be the other one that we didn't talk about from OmniLib,
which is attribution, which is essentially a, a quick program to automate the generation
of change logs, and to automate the process of cutting a release for a project. And so
I use this on all of the OmniLib projects. And essentially, I type one command attribution
release, I'm sorry, attribution tag, and then a version number. And it will drop a dunder
version dot pi in the project directory, it will create a get tag. And let's it lets you
then type in what you want the release notes to be. It's assuming you know, markdown format.
And then once it's made that tag, then it regenerates the change log for that, for that
tag and retags it appropriately. And so you get this really nice thing where the actual
tag of the project has both the updated change log, and the appropriate version number
file. So you only ever type the version in once, you only ever type the release notes
in once. And it gives you, you know, as much help and automation around that as possible.
Oh, yeah. Okay, very cool. That's a good one. All right, final call to action, people are
excited about asyncio, maybe some of the stuff at OmniLib, they want to get started,
what do you tell them?
If they want to get started on the projects, going to OmniLib.dev is the easiest way to
find the ones that are currently hosted on the project. We're always welcoming of
code review from the community. So even if you're, you know, not a maintainer, if you
are interested in reviewing pull requests, and giving feedback on things, always welcoming
of that there's never enough time in my own personal life to, to review everything or
respond to everything. Otherwise, if there are things in these projects that you are
interested in adding, like new features or fixing bugs or whatever, either open an issue
or just create a pull request. And I am more than happy to, you know, engage in design
decisions or discussions or whatever. Make sure that ideally, if you open an issue first,
make sure you're not wasting your time on a pull request that's going in the wrong direction.
Right, right. Otherwise, people might have this idea, but you're like, this is really
inconsistent where this project is meant to go or so usually, even if it's perfect, you
can't accept it, right? So good. Right. So if it's just like a bug fix or something,
then you know, probably just worth creating a pull request. And you know, I'm not going
to bite your head off. But otherwise, the only other thing I would say is that LGBTQ
things are very personal to me. And so I would ask that if you're in a position to do so
that you please donate to an LGBTQ charity that will help in the community. There's two
that I really like. One is called Power On. And that's a charity that donates technology
to LGBTQ youth. They're either homeless or disadvantaged. And they have that at poweronLGBT.org.
And then the other one is the Trevor Project, which is crisis intervention and a suicide
hotline for LGBTQ youth. And that's at the Trevor project.org. Awesome. Those are just
two examples, but there are plenty. Worst case, just donate to a food bank near you.
Cool. Yeah, that's a great advice. Great call to action. Seems like your projects
are also really open to new contributors, people getting into open source. So participating
in that way seems like a great, great thing. Fantastic. All right, John. Well, thank you
so much for being on Talk Python. It's been great to have you here. Thank you for having
me so much. I really appreciate it. Yeah, it's been fun to talk about all the async
stuff. Now, before I close the live stream, quick question. Suyash asks, can I give a
roadmap for the courses that would be super helpful for beginners? Suyash, if you're still
here, can you tell me if you mean like what courses I recommend for beginners or what
courses are coming out that might be relevant to beginners? Let me, if you're still here,
give me a sense of like structuring that. Otherwise, I'll answer the first part that
came to mind anyways, like what we got coming up. We actually have a modern Python projects
course coming up that talks about a lot of the tools that we touched on here and things
like poetry, setting up continuous integration, working with VS Code, a lot of tools around
just like making modern projects and something like attribution seems like it would fit really
well in there as well. Then we have a second FastAPI course coming. But yeah. All right,
well, I'm not seeing anything, but there's the answer anyway. Suyash, if you come back
and watch it. All right. Thanks again, John. And thanks everyone for watching.
[BLANK_AUDIO]